your work is groundbreaking because you
are looking at human evolution from the
perspective of investigating fertility
patterns that's right and we've been
able to discover some really fascinating
things with it and I think the key thing
here is that we've been able to use
these fertility patterns to see that
evolution is still going on in this town
of Framingham and that it is changing
traits such as height and weight age at
first birth age at menopause and this
was unexpected this was quite exciting
Steve chose Framingham for study because
he had access to unprecedented levels of
data about local residents spanning 60
years and by examining how many children
tall people have or blond people have or
brown eyed people have Steve has been
able to work out what the next
generation might look like it's an
entirely new approach to the study of
evolution
well it's interesting if one goes back
and looks at the way that Darwin
formulated natural selection Darwin
thought mostly about mortality and it
wasn't until sometime in the mid to late
20th century that people really realize
that it's not really mortality it's
reproductive success that is what's
changing gene frequencies given what
you've already measured can you be
specific about the changes in height and
weights that you might expect to see in
the future now what we have found with
height and weight basically is that
natural selection appears to be
operating to reduce the height and to
slightly increase their weight so people
are getting shorter soda and fashion
they're they're becoming more pleasingly
plump do you think this is something
which is I mean is it is this a real
biological change is it a genetic change
or are we just looking at a cultural
influence that people just eating well
there's no doubt that there are big
cultural effects on things like like
weight but
we can estimate what the genetic
component is of the variation in height
or the variation in weight so we're
pulling out a small genetic signal and a
fairly small selection pressure and if
this were to act consistently it would
add up to major change it isn't the
evolutionary future that many of us
would have expected but there it is
shorter and fatter but perhaps we won't
be heading in that direction forever
well I think what's very probably going
on is that selection is moving a
population up and down all the time it
goes off in a certain direction for a
while and then it goes back in the other
direction it's only if you get a
significant change in the environment
that it will then continuously go in a
new direction can you predict anything
else about how we might evolve in the
future there are there any other traits
that we might see coming to the fore in
the long term I think that where we are
going at this point is actually
absolutely unknown we see rapid
evolution when there's rapid
environmental change and the biggest
part of our environment is culture and
culture is exploding that's I really
think the the take-home message of the
Framingham study that we are continuing
to evolve the biology is going to change
with the culture and it's just a matter
of not being able to see it because
we're stuck right in the middle of the
process right now
[Music]
it seems that far from being over our
evolution is impossible to stop and the
enormous changes in the way we live over
the last century may be driving it even
faster than ever
[Music]
you